3.  Administrative  Behaviour			
01.  Process  and  Techniques  of  Decision-Making			
	Question		
	Examine  the  respective  roles  of  facts  and  values  in  the  decision  –  making process.  Is  it  possible  to  make  value  –  free  decisions  in  government  decisions be  made  more  rational?		
02.  Communication			
	Question		
	Communication  represents  the  “Nerves  of  Government"  (Karl  Deutsch).  How can  the  communication  system  in  the  government  be  made  more  effective, responsive and motivational?		
	“Information  constitutes  the  life  –  blood  of  the  functioning  of  an  organization. “ Explain  the  utility  and significance of communication in decision –  making.		
	“The   nature   and   role   of   communication   in   administration   indicates   that “Communication  is  authority”.  Comment.		
	“Information  constitutes  the  life  –  blood  of  the  functioning  of  organization.”  In the     light     of     this     statement,     explain     the     utility     and     importance     of communication in  decision –  making.		
03.  Morale			
	Question		
	Morale  can  drive  an  organization  forward  or  can  lead  employees’  discontent, poor job performance and absenteeism.”  Examine.		
	What   is   the   nature   of   psychological   contract   pursued   by   organizational management  trough  authority  and  the  employees  through  exertion  of  upward influence?		
	What  is  meant  by  morale?  There  is  a  belief  that  “moral  and  productivity  go hand   in   hand   and   higher   the   morale,   higher   is   the   productivity.   “Do   you agree? Substantiate.		
	What   is   morale?   State   its   significance   and   suggest   methods   to   foster   and sustain morale  in an organization		
04.  Motivation  Theories-  Content,  Process  and  Contemporary			
	Question		
	Two factor theory entails certain factors in workplace, resulting in job satisfaction while other, if absent, lead to dissatisfaction, discuss		
	Read  the  following  instances  carefully  and  suggest  what  specific  perspectives on    organizational    psychology    of    motivation    would    help    the    concerned organization   to   reconcile   the   needs   of   the   following   four   persons   with   the needs    of    the    organization:    i)    Mr.    A    comes    to    his    office    with    clocklike punctuality;  does  his  work  with  impeccable  honesty  and  integrity;  takes  order from  above  gladly; responds  well to overtures  by peers; but  neither  mixes  with anyone  himself  nor  seeks  anyone’s  company.  What  is  more,  he  seem  quite happy  in  his  isolation.  ii)Mr.B  is  an  efficient  charge  –  hand  at  the  welding shop.  He  is  very  outgoing  and  makes  friends  fast,  but  falls  out  with  them  very fast  too.  He  is,  however,  easily  pacified  when  anyone  asks  him  to  calm  down in  the  name  of  the  organization.  iii)  Dr.  C  is  completely  happy  and  absorbed when   he   is   teaching   in   the   classes,   and   does   not   at   all   mind   when   his workload   gets   heavier   and   covers   new   areas.  But   he   gets   angry   when   the finance  section  raises  objections  about  his  medical  bills;  and  is  furious  that the  higher  administration  is  furious  that  the  higher  administration  is  yet  to give  him  full  tenure.  iv)  Mr.  is  a  metallurgist  in  the  forge  shop  of  the  steel plant,    and    has    received    honours    for    his    innovativeness    in    modifying conventional   alloys.   He   also   paints   well   and   values   his   painting   skills   far more  than  his  metallurgy  and  is  extremely  unhappy  that  the  company  house jurnal did  not finally carry  his  water  sketch on its front  cover.		
	‘Men’s    motives...in    different    subparts    of    the    same    organization    may    be different’ [Edgar  Schein].  Discuss.		
	“Abraham   Maslow’s   Hierarchy   of   Needs’   and   Frederick   Herzberg’s   “Two   – Factor   theory’,   have   commonalities   in   the   analysis   of   human   motivation. Comment.		
	“Motivation  theory  is  not  synonymous  with  behavior  theory.  The  motivations are   only   one   class   of   determinants   of   behavior   while   behavior   is   almost always    motivated,    it    is    also    almost    always    biologically,    culturally    and situationally determined as  well.”  Comment.		
	Compare  Abraham  Maslow’s  theory  of  motivation  and  Herzberg’s  motivation  – hygiene  theory.  Do  you  think  that  they  are  universally  applicable?  If  so,  why? If  not, why not?		
05.  Theories  of  Leadership-Traditional  and  Modern			
	Question		
	"A  leader  is  a  people's  developer"  (Napoleon)  .  Which  aspects  of  subordinates' development  can be positively influenced by  a leader  ? Discuss.		
	“Leaders  do  the  right  things;  managers  do  them  rightly”-  (Warren  Bennis)  .  Is this  distinction  by him  valid?  Explain		
	“Blake   and   Mouton   defined   leadership   styles   based   on   two   dimensions   – concern  for  people  and  concern  for  production.”  In  the  light  of  the  statement, discuss  the  managerial  Grid  Model.  Explain  with  reason  which  one   of  the styles is  the  best.		
	Do  you  agree  with  the  view  that  the  charismatic  approach  of  the  mid  1970s  is a “new  version” of the Classical  Trait  Theory  of  Leadership?  Give reasons.		
	Leadership     is     the     ‘influential     increment     over     and     above     mechanical compliance  with  the  routine  directives  of  the  organization’  [Katz  and  Kahn]. Analyze.		
	“Leaders  do the  right things,  managers do  them rightly.  (Bennis) Comment		
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
			
